# North America in 1800
   > Date: 01-02-20 .
   > Instructor: David Work.
---   

## Political Climate
   * The U.S. was a small and poor nation at this time, and surrounded by European powers and some of the land they had was inhabited by Native Americans .
   * Dominated by **Federalists**.
      > Federalists favored active government support of the economy, and a strong national government over state, and supported large cities and manufacturing.
       The Federalists put in place an economic program featuring the Bank of The U.S., this regulated the economy.
   * **John Adams**, a federalist, was president.
   * **Thomas Jefferson**, a **Republican**, won the presidency.
      > The Republicans opposed the Federalists and their ideals, the polar opposites.
       Thomas Jefferson believed in a **agrarian nation**, composed of small farmers, as opposed to large cities and manufacturing.
       Aimed to reduce nationial debt.
       **Alien and Sedition Acts**: He cut all federalist programs, **EXCEPT** the Bank of The U.S. .
       He cut the army three quarters, and almost elimated the navy.
       He elimated **ALL** internal taxes, goverment revenue came from **tariffs**.
       He made it easier to buy western land to help his dream of an agrarian nation.
   * In 1811, the charter for the Bank of the U.S. expired, and was **NOT** renewed.
   * Great mistake in the War of 1812.
   
## Major Domestic Issue
   * John Adams, stayed up until **midnight** on his last day in office, signing federalist judges commisions.
   * This was to gain control of the federal judiciery, by creating a lot of federalist judges.
   * These were known as the **Midnight Judges**.
   * Jefferson **refused to mail the commisions**, in his mind if he did not send out the commisions, the Midnight Judges would not become judges.
   * **Marbury**, one of the Midnight Judges, sued for his commision.
   
### Marbury vs. Madison
   * **Madison was the secretary of state**, his job was to send out the commisions.
   * This case goes to the supreme court, led by a **federalist** judge, **Marshal**.
     > Marshal was Jeffersons' cousin and appointed by Adams .
   * Marshal said by right, Marbury should be given his commision.
   * The court however could not force the President to do this, because the law under which Marbury was suing was **unconstitutional** and thus void..
   * Marshal created **Judicial Review**.
      > The right of the Supreme Court to review federal laws, and decide whether they conflict with the constitution or not.
   * While this had the implication of giving more power to the Supreme Court, Jefferson could not protest as the Midnight Judges were gone. Jefferson had won in the short term, and lost in the long term.
   
## Two Foreign Policy Issues
   * Jeffersons first term sought two highly important foreign policy issues.
   
### The Barbary States
   * Muslim pirates that attack ships in the mediterranian.
   * The European bribed them to not attack them.
   * In the 1790s, Washington and Adams would also bribe them to not attack U.S. ships.
   * Jefferson did not like this policy.
      > Jefferson believed in free trade, and the frrom of the seas, ships should be allowed to sail without fear.
   * Jefferson refused to pay the bribe and so the Barbary states declared war.
   * Jefferson sent what was left of the navy into battle.
   * The war lasted two years and it was declared inconclusive.
   * Jefferson gave in and payed the bribes.
   * Under Madison in 1815, the war was renewed, however this time they sent a much larger navy.
   * They crushed the Barbary pirates, and forced them to sign a treaty to not attack U.S. ships.
      > This was a major victory of the young republic.
       Demonstrated the U.S. would use the military to defend overseas U.S. interests.
   
### The Louisiana Purchase
   * Jefferson wanted Lousiana and New Orleans.
      > wanted Louisiana for the land, to help build his agrarian nation, and New Orleans as a port to trade.
       Louisiana was vitally important, according to Jefferson .
       So important Jefferson considered making a treaty with the hated British.
       If the French did not sell Louisiana America could not grow westward.
   * By 1803, Spain did not control Louisiana, it was controlled by France and Napoleon.
      > France was the dominant military power in Europe.
       Very Imperialist, Jefferson did not like this.
   * Napoleon wanted Lousiana as a bread basket to feed France and her colonies.
      > This was signalled by when he sent an army of his to reconquer Hade, after the slaves there rebelled.
       Clear signal of imperial vision.
   * Jefferson sent an diplomat to Paris to offer $10 million for New Orleans .
   * Before the diplomat reached Paris, two important things happened.
      > His army he sent to Hade was wiped out by mosqitoes, carrying the yellow fever .
       Outbreak of war in Europe: France vs Everyone Else.
   * Napoleon declined the offer, but he needed money to fund the war.
   * Napoleon countered with an offer of $15 million, however he would also sell Louisiana alongside New Orleans.
   * This creates a constitutional problem, as while Jefferson wanted to take the offer, there was nothing in the constition stating he could buy territory.
      > Jefferson believed in strict interpretation: the goverment can only do what is specifically told in the constitution.
       He contemplates over this, but finally he decides to ignore it.
       Essentially adopting the Federalist position, implied powers: even if the constituion doesn't specifically say it doesn't mean you can't do it.
       But Federalists objected, flip flopping their position .
   * The Louisiana purchase transformed the U.S. into a continental power.
      > It almost doubled the size of the nation.
       It put U.S. on the path to becoming the dominant power in NA.
       Provided territory full of unmeasurable wealth, oil, gold, farmland, and other resources.
       Ensured the U.S. controlled the Mississipi, thus can be used as a trade route.
       Considered the greatest accomplishment of Jefferson's presidency.
   * Jefferson wanted to explore and discover what was in there.
   
## The Louis and Clark expedition
   * Louis and Clark had three missions.
      > Explore territory, and map regions.
       Identify plants and animals and other resources they encountered.
       Make contact with natives, and inform them it was U.S. territory.
   * This would begin the process in which the U.S. would conquer the region.
   
